Analog computer, any of a class of devices in which continuously variable physical quantities, such as electrical potential, fluid pressure, or mechanical motion, are represented in a way analogous to the corresponding quantities in the problem to be solved. The analog system is set up according to initial conditions and then allowed to change freely. Answers to the problem are obtained by measuring the variables in the analog model. See also digital computer.

The earliest analog computers were special-purpose machines, as for example the tide predictor developed in 1873 by William Thomson (later known as Lord Kelvin). Along the same lines, A.A. Michelson and S.W. Stratton built in 1898 a harmonic analyzer having 80 components. Each of these was capable of generating a sinusoidal motion, which could be multiplied by constant factors by adjustment of a fulcrum on levers. The components were added by means of springs to produce a resultant. Another milestone in the development of the modern analog computer was the invention of the differential analyzer in the early 1930s by Vannevar Bush, an American electrical engineer, and his colleagues. This machine, which used mechanical integrators (gears of variable speed) to solve differential equations, was the first practical and reliable device of its kind.

Electronic analog computers developed in the mid-20th century operated by manipulating potential differences (voltages). Their basic component was an operational amplifier, a device whose output current was proportional to its input potential difference. By causing this output current to flow through appropriate components, further potential differences were obtained, and a wide variety of mathematical operations, including inversion, summation, differentiation, and integration, could be carried out on them. A typical electronic analog computer consisted of numerous types of amplifiers, which could be connected so as to build up a mathematical expression, sometimes of great complexity and with a multitude of variables.

Analog computers were especially well suited to simulating dynamic systems; such simulations could be conducted in real time or at greatly accelerated rates, thereby allowing experimentation by repeated runs with altered variables. They were widely used in simulations of aircraft, nuclear power plants, and industrial chemical processes. Other major uses included analysis of hydraulic networks (e.g., flow of liquids through a sewer system) and electronics networks (e.g., performance of long-distance circuits). By the 1970s, analog computers had been replaced by faster, more powerful digital computers.

Source:
  britannica.com/technology/analog-computer%
